Hi Thilo,

--A bit long but bear with me!--

Thanks for your speedy response and for your feedback into the work so far. Your points are well-taken, and I have a few thoughts in response.

I very much enjoyed Chen Sun's thesis, and I feel that I have a better grasp of your vision for the ANIME model. It dawned on me while reading that these projects emerge from the same roots but are chasing after two subtly different questions. It would seem to me that the approach described in Chen Sun's thesis is very much focused on exploring how these different types of interactions spelled out in ANIME can promote biodiversity (randomly created, feasible webs), and I can see how the model rules really need to be kept at a minimum so that aspects of the system remain analytically tractable. This seems very foundational and I can see how the questions that you posed in your email could be explored using a similar framework. I can also see the very definite links to the larger body of random matrix theory, which is a huge plus and quite exciting! And with respect to that work, I would be excited to learn more about where you plan to take it and would love to help out/participate if I could.

What I am hoping to explore with the framework described in the prototype-methods that I sent you is a bit different. Here we are more focused on exploring the effects of an ecologically motivated assembly process... and though we have different externally imposed constraints, I think that we may be able to predict some of the constraints that would in contrast be inputs in the Chen Sun model... so I see the two approaches as being potentially quite complimentary...

For example, our initial exploration of the dynamics described show that the community caps itself out at a realistic number of trophic levels (related to the chain length constraint). Moreover the interactions that emerge from the assembly process have degree distributions different than expected from chance, with generalism favored over specialism. The downside of our approach is that it is probably not analytical but numerical in nature, but I think that it still may bear fruit. The extinction dynamic seems to be playing an important role here, as it appears to be the primary mechanism constraining too many trophic levels, though we haven't explored that rigorously yet.

I think you are right in your suggestion to limit and simplify the input and assumptions, (e.g. not imposing a trophic degree distributions among other things). If we remove the imposition of a trophic degree distribution, the set of rules for the  model are quite minimal (and would be explained more succinctly in the actual manuscript than the draft methods that I sent to you, which are overly detailed and repetitive):

The input:
1) Drawing the interactions and objects for the species pool (this involves 3 parameters: probability of eat, probability of need, and expected objects per species)
2) Colonization requires fulfilling eat and need thresholds
3) Extinction probabilities increase with the number of predators

...there are other areas where we could simplify more and I will start exploring that...

In some respect, I see our extinction dynamic and your avoid-by-competitive-exclusion rule to be similar. I suppose the main difference is that ours is indirect, and the aim was to incorporate the typically-indirect nature of competitive exclusion (via resource competition). This is also a potential connection between these two theories... In both the Chen Sun model and the one I described, I do not see a need for an 'Avoid' interaction... avoidance in natural systems generally results from competitive overlap, which seems to be already built-in to both models (interaction similarity in the Chen Sun model, and extinction from too many predators in the other). 

If it is assembly that we are exploring, I think that colonization/extinction rules make more ecological sense than inputing an 'Avoid' interaction, which is why we opted to drop it and allow competition for resources to indirectly create avoidance between species... i.e. if too many things eat the same resource, it may go extinct, which could have the effect of eliminating the sole resource for one of the competing species. In the assembly literature, this seems to be a central dynamic. That said, I think it would be very interesting to switch out the predation-extinction rule with an interaction-similarity rule to see how this changes results, and this seems to be an obvious potential connection.

Our elimination of 'Avoid' spurred us to find an alternative (somewhat inferior) acronym for ANIME - replacing Eat with Assimilate and dropping the E. I also find 'eat' to be more direct! However, it is unfortunate that the ANIME acronym leads with 'Avoid', since it is the Eat and Need interactions that are true interactions, while an Avoid interaction seems qualitatively different to me. Brainstorming: there is an alternative acronym here that keeps Eat and Avoid:

Eat Need IGnore Make Avoid: ENIGMA

Our assembly model would just drop the Avoid to have ENIGMa

Of course we could also drop Avoid to get: aNIME... obviously everything we do should follow the coolest acronym!


To reiterate, I see these two models to be chasing somewhat different goals, though it would be best to find where they could best be fitted together. In a sense I see the Chen Sun model to be more foundational, and our assembly framework to be an 'application' of the theme. I'm still rolling these ideas in my head, but initial thoughts are:

1) we could write sister-collaborative papers where we find the strongest points of connection to pair the approaches, and then diverge from there: this could be a strong way to sell the method as it would demonstrate its flexibility to tackling different types of problems
2) we try to put both approaches into a very large paper
3) we publish them seperately (but I think the approaches should still be linked as much as possible)


Would love to hear your thoughts about this, and would be happy to try to schedule a skype meeting to chat in person. Obviously there will also be opportunities this summer!

I'll begin stripping down our model to minimize assumptions, and will look for the most obvious places to link the ANIMe assembly model to the Chen Sun model and will keep you up to date with any progress... Of course any recommendations or thoughts with regard to this would be appreciated and well-received!

Cheers,
Justin




